Do you remember this person? He appears in
the movie "Baahubali"
What was he trying to say? He is wanting to convey something.
Even if we couldn't understand the language
AT ALL, somehow we were drawn into the story,
we were made to believe he was threatening
us, the setting, the story, the environment,
the dress, the body language,.. goes beyond
language.. This is enough for us, to convey
a story. The art of presentation.
That is the topic for today.
Intro music
Namaste! A book titled "Presentation Zen" caught my
eye. A book focused on the Art of Making Presentations.
How to design them, how to plan them out,
how to deliver them, beautifully. Zen… In
the Japanese Buddhist style… A book by Garr
Reynolds. In this book, I liked many things
about it. But, what was extra special about
this book? Well, it refers to another book
inside it. That the world is changing.. That
there are two halves to the human brain. There
is a bias now towards the right side of the
brain. Yes.. the right-brain left-brain - people
have been discrediting it as a myth. But,
beyond that, to not just look at the logical
bits but also the holistic aspect of everything - is
important, says Daniel Pink, the author. And,
these New Age people that Daniel Pink describes
in his book,… a New Age of Conceptualisation
from the Age of Information, if we are to
deliver presentations to these people, what
are the methods and approaches? That is what
the Presentation Zen book covers so amply.
It gives a very detailed description about
how to approach it.
In the Whole New Mind book, the author talks
about six aspects - six important aspects
that comprise our thought process. And, so,
in the Presentation Zen book, the advice from
the author, Garr Reynolds, is that a presenter
has to look for ways to address these six
important aspects in their presentations.
What are those six aspects? Let us look at
them!
Number One is Design. It is not just the function.
Not just whether it works. Design. The moment
you hear Design, you shouldn't start thinking
picture, color, paint. Which is why this quote
by Steve Jobs is so important. It is not about
what it looks like, what it feels like, it
is about how it works! The moment you think
you are designing something, if you recall
"color", "frame", "shape", "structure", "size",
probably you are not doing it right. While
talking about not doing something right, this
comes to mind. They said it was the best-designed
ship. The Titanic. We know what happened.
They were giving more importance to the shiny
brass doorknobs probably, than to whether
will it float?! Design. We need to redefine
the meaning of the word "Design" itself. So,
do not jump into choosing the typeface, the
font, the size, the color of your presentation,
prepare the content first. Prepare the concept
first. Beat it around. And then, get to the
brass tacks.
The second aspect is Story. If you go all
the back to the Cave Man, you wouldn't find
a classroom, you wouldn't find people reading
and writing. Even before all that, the first
communication started around storytelling.
Do you know how large a lion I saw? Do you
know what a strong blow I dealt it then? The
storyteller goes on, and the others follow
his every word with rapt attention. Probably
the world's first profession was Presenting!
Do you realise? He has even pulled it off
without any slides! So, it is not just argument,
coming up with your logical proposal, it is
also about an emotion-laden story. So, even
before starting to think about your presentation,
ask yourself what story you are going to tell.
What are you going to do to motivate, inspire
and move us…?
Look at this picture, for example. Is there
a story? Can you create a murder story around
this? Can you create a happy family meal story
around this? Can you create a mystery around
this? Left to you. But, everything has a story
to tell. Let us not forget that!
The third aspect is Symphony. It is not only
about focusing on the bits and pieces, the
component parts, it is also about how they
all come together. How do we weave them? How
do we combine them, thread them, summarise
them, and present it as one unified whole?
The word symphony may remind you of this..
Eine Kleine Nachtmusik, perhaps. But go beyond
that. Yes, music is composed of the seven
notes. Sapta Swaras.
But, what about words? Every sentence anybody
ever wrote is composed of words. A million
words perhaps, in the English dictionary.
Every word is composed of these 26 letters.
Nobody is going to invent a new one. So, it
is about putting the pieces together.
What about the periodic table? Any matter
you see anywhere in this universe, is probably
just made of 118 elements, they say.
If we go even further down, probably neutron,
proton, electron, and if you divide them even
smaller, there is a quark, there is a lepton,
there is a hadron, there is a boson, component
pieces. Don't worry about the component pieces,
don't worry about inventing, discovering,
coming up with something, postulating something
new… Look at the old stuff, connect them
interestingly, and present to us. People do
not come to an orchestra to listen to new
sounds… They come to listen to their old
friends, their old notes, composed and strung
together interestingly.
The next aspect the author talks about is
Empathy. Empathy basically means it is not
just about speaking, it is also about understanding
whether you are being heard! Empathy, in the
context of a presenter and an audience is,
to understand from the audience's point of
view. This, incidentally, is Manikandan Vembu,
the COO of Zoho Corporation. He had visited
Zoho Schools, where I work, and we had an
hour-long conversation with our students.
Time seemed to have stopped - the talk
was so engrossing. Towards the end, he launched
into a mini-lecture of sorts! I proposed to
him - if we could continue this for a
bit longer.. The students were interested
and engaged.. Immediately, he brought back
a memory from his school times. He said, I
have attended many such lectures myself. And,
sitting in the last bench, our only unasked
question would be, when will the man finish
talking! I know the student mindset! No talk
can last longer than an hour. However interesting
the person is. And, I know how I have been
doing. He demonstrated that humility (of course)
and self-knowledge. A great example of empathy.
This is in short supply today. Most presenters.
Most communicators… forget about the most
important aspect of listening for feedback.
While performing, are they listening, are
they engaging, are they resonating, is something
that is very important to observe and know.
The fifth aspect is Play. Again.., Corporate?
Official? Business? We immediately tell ourselves,
no way, we can't mix it with pleasure, fun,
play. What you are seeing is a TED Talk. A
TED TALK! This guy, a scientist, his name
is Clifford Stoll, see what he does. See what ALL he does.
Anybody seen a slide? Written on the palm?
Animated. Excited. Nervous Energy!
The guy sitting behind is Anderson himself. The guy
who created TED for us all. What's wrong with
this?! So, let your hair down. When you present,
if you are too serious all the time, you give
the impression that you know everything. That
you have figured out everything. Let us all
agree that there are things that cannot be
figured out. There are things you cannot break
your head at any more. Humour. Fun. Tongue-in-cheek.
Is a great escape valve. Use that.
And, finally, Meaning. Every one of us, we
are in the quest for something. We are searching
for something. Could be, Reason for existence.
Could be Solutions. Could be New Approaches.
Could be, an Audience for a philosophy or
a concept we have come up with. Most important
thing here is… it is not just accumulating
whatever we encounter, it is about putting
them together and seeing meaning. We are standing
like this… Actually though, we are standing
like THIS. In this darkness, in this ocean,
where we are probably just a nobody, a light
in my hand too, let me also shine mine too..
You respect me as an individual, all of you
are here. Here is something that I want to
put forward. Please take it, and check if
that helps you in your quest for meaning.
That is how we should finalise this.
So, these are the six aspects in The Whole
New Mind, and Garr Reynolds of Presentation
Zen tells us to keep these in mind when going
about building our presentations.
But, I want to share a closing thought here,
could be a negative thought. The point is,
I felt he stabbed me in the back. Look at
the cover for the book. Presentation Zen 3.
He has even mentioned it in an interview.
It is simple. Look at the cover. Simple. Doesn't
even say Third Edition. Just Three. Isn't
that a mistake? What would we immediately
think? When we see Three? We would be misled
into looking for One and Two. Yes? Because
we would assume this is the Third Volume.
Am I wrong? So, make things simple. But, don't
oversimplify, and end up confusing me. I felt
stabbed in the back. I don't know about you.
Three! Thank you!